I feel like I spent already half of my
life in this [music] war. I don't know
to which Ukraine we will come back after
the war. It will be another Ukraine with
lots of dramatic stories.
>> Andre Kirkov, widely regarded as
Ukraine's greatest living writer.
How do you keep your energy up, let
alone your spirits up?
>> [music]
>> My morale is kept by my friends, by my
readers, by my connection to the world,
by my desire to write, by new ideas, by
coffee that I drink too much. I hope
that the war will be over this year or
next year. [music] This is my dream.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, [music]
this is the Michelle Hussein Show.
We'll soon reach the 4-year anniversary
of fullscale war in Ukraine. It's a
moment that's been making me think about
the realities of a longunning conflict,
its impact on civilians. As one
Ukrainian living in London said to me
recently in the simplest of terms,
"We're so tired." And I know that
millions of her fellow citizens have
spent this winter in freezing
conditions. It's the harshest winter for
20 years, but they've been living with
little heating or electricity because
Russia has been attacking critical
infrastructure.
This conflict is already longer than
America's entire involvement in the
Second World War. And as the anniversary
approaches and as defense and security
figures gather in Munich for the
security conference, we wanted to have a
different kind of conversation about
Ukraine, one that is about life and art
as well as war and peace. And so we've
turned to Andre Kirkov, the Ukrainian
writer who is best known for his 1990s
novel Death and the Penguin, but who has
published many other books, including
since the war began, three volumes of
War Diaries. His work has been
translated into many languages and
published around the world. But he's
also had to navigate complex questions
of identity because his mother tongue is
Russian and that is the language in
which he writes his fiction. He has
spent much of the last four years at
home in Kiev. But for this conversation
he joined me from a writer's retreat in
France.
>> It was impossible to to write at home. I
was writing mostly in the cafes but also
this became difficult and I mean uh not
sleeping because of the explosions is
different thing from not sleeping
because of the cold and when actually
you have three hot water bottles and big
plastic bottles from coke filled with
boiled water in your bed I don't think
it is very good also for for your health
and then when the hot water bottles go
cold you fill immediately Could you even
think about anything other than the need
to stay warm?
>> Well, I was thinking mostly about
springtime and I think many Ukrainians
are now not thinking about the war. They
are thinking about when the springtime
starts when actually the warmth comes
back when the cold is gone. So I mean
the winter became thanks to Russia
became the main enemy. Uh because
actually this time the winter allied
with Russia. I read words that you wrote
about the most heroic people being the
plumbers, the ones that everyone wants
and whose work is valued more than
anyone else as they repair the
infrastructure.
>> Well, it's not only plumbers, it's
electricians. And unfortunately, I mean,
we had cases of these people uh
collapsing uh because they didn't have
sleep for three, four days. They were
going from uh one uh accident to
another. I mean, they had heart attacks
or other problems and several people
died. Several plumbers died,
electricians died, and you can consider
them the victims of the war, the victims
of Russian aggression because they they
were saving other people. They were
saving civilians.
>> Can I ask you to step back in time for a
moment and to remember February 2022,
nearly four years ago now, as the full
scale war began, because you've
chronicled the war since through your
diaries. What does the moment of this
anniversary feel like to you? What does
it represent?
>> I feel like I spent already half of my
life in this war. I I I do remember 25th
and 26th of February 2022. I remember
the night we had to spend in the
Carpathian Mountains when we were
fleeing from Kiev by car with nine
people inside the minivan and got stuck
in the traffic jam and it was minus5
Celsius etc. I think there was much more
despair then than now. Now actually war
became part of daily life and uh became
part of lottery because you never know
who will be killed tomorrow by drones or
by missiles or by anything else and you
just live every day at a time hoping
that we will survive till the next year
and year after next but with no
guarantee and uh at the same time it
doesn't make me sad. I think I lost the
feeling of fear because I remember the
fear which paralyzed me. Uh when I heard
the first explosions in cave this is
life now you if you cannot stand it you
become a refugee you go abroad you stay
there you settle there but if you
decided to stay you have to ignore the
the fear because fear stops you from
doing things you stop functioning. So
you accept new rules. You learn new
rules of survival. You know uh what you
should do first when you hear the air
alert. You check if it is drones or
missiles. If these are missiles, are
they cruise missiles or ballistic
missiles from where to where they are
flying? Uh what is the chance that they
will hit area around you? And then you
decide whether you go in the corridor or
you go into the bomb shelter or you run
to the metro station and go down the
escalator. So I mean lots of things like
this
>> and of course I understand that human
beings can and will adjust to the most
extreme of circumstances because that's
reality and it has to happen. I do
wonder what you think has been lost in
this period even if there was more
despair in 2022 than there is now. This
does feel like a particularly harsh and
perilous moment. So when you think about
the period ahead, are you apprehensive?
Are you fearful of what it will hold for
Ukraine?
>> I'm worried. After the beginning of
full-scale invasion, there was much more
solidarity among Ukrainians. The nation
was consolidated. We had one enemy. We
managed to uh liberate Kiev region and
Kharkiv region. There was some kind of
faith that we can withstand, we can
defend the country and now we have
Ukraine fragmented. Fragmented I mean
that we have unknown number of people
who remained on the occupied
territories. We don't know what is
happening to them. Some of them are
happy to be under Russian rules. Some of
them are not. We have soldiers on the
front line. We have refugees abroad. We
have displaced people four or five
million who are extremely unhappy. And
of course, we have still more than half
of Ukraine living at home uh but
listening to the explosions and seeing
the neighboring houses in flames uh and
not knowing what will happen tomorrow
and now without heating. Uh so I mean
these Ukraines uh should be uh
reconnected, reunited after the war and
I don't believe Ukrainian government on
on its own can achieve this. I mean it
can be done only if all European
countries and actually all democratic
countries unite to help Ukraine to be
reconstructed and only if the if the
country is reconstructed then actually
this unity of Ukrainians can be uh
reconstructed.
>> I'm conscious as I hear you talk that
over these four years you've become much
more journalist commentator interpreter
of Ukraine to the outside world. For a
while you found it hard to write
fiction. I know it's returned to you,
but do you miss your old life when you
could devote yourself more fully to the
writing of your imagination rather than
interpreting the real world?
>> Yes, definitely. Definitely. I mean I uh
I think psychologically actually I
suffered a lot when I tried and I
couldn't uh continue the novel uh about
Ke in 1919 the lost soldiers which was
finally finished only in November 2024
and actually when I finished this novel
I was extremely happy I thought that I
will start a new novel at once and I
couldn't for another year and only now
actually I managed to write every day a
chapter or one chapter and half for the
new novel, but this new novel is not
about key of 1919. It's about Ukraine
2026.
>> And when you say that you couldn't
finish the novel or it took you a long
time to finish the novel, was that
because there's so much happening in the
outside world that preoccupies you, the
war obviously, but also because it felt
indulgent to retreat into your fiction.
What was the actual reason? Well, the
first idea was that actually it is a
sinful thing because writing fiction is
a pleasure. Uh, writing non-fiction is a
duty or but I mean it's more neutral. It
can be a pleasure of course too. But I
think the main reason was that I
couldn't get distracted from the
reality. I was following the news. I was
following the air alerts. I was
following the stories of my friends and
relatives and neighbors and people I
never met before. Uh, and I was part of
the war. And so this was the main reason
because when you write a fiction you
have to be able to to live the reality
to go away from reality for several at
least hours a day and then you return to
reality by the end of the working day
but I mean this was impossible and
probably it's also subconsciously you
are looking for positive news also
positive news in the military sense and
you are checking the news in order to
see that we are not losing we are not
giving in And what do you think is the
truth of that? What's your assessment?
Who's winning?
>> Nobody's winning. I don't see winners
here. Uh I think Trump wants to be a
winner. He wants to be a winner in the
sense that he is a peacemaker, but I
mean he is not a peacemaker. He's a
business dealer. Uh and he wants to have
a business deal with Russia and Ukraine
is an obstacle. So I mean this war is an
obstacle for him to restart investing in
Russia and get more profit uh again from
uh joint oil projects and from other
projects.
>> You grew up in the Soviet Union so
you've seen the big moment of transition
earlier in your life. You wrote about
it. It was the backdrop to your novel
Death and the Penguin. Are these the
moments in all their extremity
where you also find inspiration? You
find your material because I know your
latest novels, your crime novels are set
in that in the immediate aftermath of
revolutionary time. So again, an extreme
period.
>> Yes. I mean probably it's my destiny and
destiny of most of Ukrainians to live
through tragedies through the times
which cannot be uh described as uh
prosperity time and good times. We had
moments of prosperity. I mean we had
very good life uh before 2010
and even uh it was not bad before 2022
although the war that started in
February 2014 did sort of cost us
psychological pain and economical
troubles. Yes. uh but generally yes uh
when I think that actually Ukrainians uh
lived through the centuries through so
many tragedies but this time actually
Ukrainians are fighting they are
defending the land they are defending
their freedom I don't think there will
be any easy time in the future in the
nearest future so as Ukrainian writers
have to to describe everything what we
witness and also to to look for
parallels historical parallels and that
helps us to understand better actually
Ukrainian mentality and what can happen
in the future also if we do something
wrong.
>> Do you have relatives in Russia? And I
asked that because I know your parents
moved from Russia to Ukraine and Russian
is your mother tongue. Do you have
family in Russia still?
>> There might be relatives but I didn't
have contacts with them for last 35
years. Actually my father who died
before covid he kept correspondence with
a couple of relatives from rostovan don
from northern caucuses because uh my
father's family comes from this region
they were don ksaks I personally don't
have any connection and we moved
actually to my grandmother who lived in
ke and we have a lot of relatives here
my cousins live in ke and their families
and my aunt so I have no more connection
I mean I know that I had two cousins in
in in Russia and family of my mother's
brother. Uh but I don't know where are
they and what happened to them.
>> And friends are there friends in Russia
who you lost because of having different
opinions on this war.
>> I lost them actually during orange
revolution. It was already 20 20 years
ago. That was the moment, the Orange
Revolution, when Ukraine started to
assert a more European identity or
started to chart a path away out of
Russia's orbit.
>> Yeah. It was 2004, 2005 when the
elections were rigged and a pro-Russian
candidate almost became the president.
He did become a president later in 2010.
And then he was the reason for another
revolution in Ukraine which is called
Euromaidan. and then he escaped to
Moscow and still lives there in exile.
I'm talking about Victor Anukokovic. But
it's true actually 2004 2005 this Maidan
protests were already these signs that
Ukraine will never go back to the Soviet
past or to Russian system of
authoritarian regime.
>> And what did you think when you were a
young man in your 20s and seeing the
Soviet Union come to an end? Did you
have a vision then of Ukraine as an
independent sovereign nation or did you
always think there would be a sibling
type relationship with Russia?
>> Well, I mean when everything was
collapsing in 1991, of course, I mean I
was first puzzled and surprised by
everybody else because I mean I was
antisviet dissident, not as serious as
my elder brother. But I couldn't first
imagine what will happen next. And then
suddenly I uh naively became very
optimistic and I thought that now as
Ukraine is much smaller than Russia, it
will be much more easier to make of
Ukraine as civilized European country
which will have stable uh European
democratic values and rules and
everything will function. And of course
these hopes of mine were crashed by uh
the first posts Soviet years because we
had a mafia run state with a huge
inflation with people being afraid to
leave the flats to go outside because
different gangs were shooting at each
other and I remember that my parents
were afraid to leave the the apartment
in the first weeks after the collapse.
But then actually then slowly the
country was changing and slowly I'm
saying from uh my personal point of view
but from the point of view of history
the changes were very quick because I
mean like I have a feeling that I lived
in five or six different Ukraines since
and the Ukraine of the 1998 99 2000 was
already quite comfortable and life was
easy and there was something to do and
you had freedom and you didn't have
censorship and you could publish
whatever you wanted to publish if you
were a writer not a journalist being a
journalism was a difficult thing and a
dangerous thing in Ukraine but I don't
know to which Ukraine we will come back
after the war it will be another Ukraine
it will be very different Ukraine and
probably with lots of dramatic stories
personal stories
>> and do you feel that you have been
changed by these four years.
>> I think everybody was changed. My first
change that I notic in myself is that I
stopped valuing material things and uh
[clears throat] it's it's quite unusual
for me because I was always a collector
from being a child. I was collecting
stamps, old coins, icons, ancient
newspapers and magazines etc. and old
venils and gramophones. I have a
collection of grammophones and suddenly
all of that became uh useless and not
important. Uh the other thing if we talk
about writing I couldn't write before
the war uh violent scenes. I mean I I
was avoiding blood uh in the literary
texts and it is very easy for me now. I
mean uh uh writing violent
describing violent situations is just uh
a normality because violence became a
normality. It is daily piece of news.
But of course I mean there are other
changes. The fact that I learned all the
roots out of Ukraine
this is interesting. I mean you become
an unwilling adventurer. You have to
calculate on which border crossing you
will spend less time and which country
will be more friendly to you as to a
Ukrainian than uh the others.
>> So amidst all of this, you know that
defense and security figures, political
figures from many countries including
the US and of course Europe are
gathering in Munich for the big security
conference. What would you say to them
if you had a slot on that stage?
>> Well, I would tell them to think about
another measures to have an influence on
Putin, on Russia to stop this crazy war,
to stop killing people by cold, by
missiles, by drones, by their
thermabaric bombs which are destroying
the villages because we are living in
21st century unlike Russia. Russia
prefers middle age. It's okay. But I
mean Putin will not stop unless he is
forced to stop. And uh to smile and to
say that we should still keep uh
peaceful conversation or find try to
find a common language with Russia uh I
mean it doesn't make sense. I mean the
only language Russia would understand
economical pressure, diplomatic
pressure, military pressure and
solidarity which is uh becoming elusive
because I mean like I don't feel that
actually the the US government is
supporting us. They want to put an end
uh to the war for different reasons.
Europe is more involved now. Uh but
still I mean we want more from Europe.
We didn't have two days ago enough
missiles to shoot down the missiles from
Russia and now the town of Bushin is
without heating and hot water and
running water and electricity.
>> So this US support being so elusive. The
latest that we've heard from President
Zilinski at the time of us speaking is
that the US wants the war to end by
June. When you hear those words, what
goes through your mind? that America
will try to push Zalinski to push
Ukrainian government to accept the loss
of territories uh practically to accept
capitulation which will be camouflaged
as some kind of peace deal because I
mean nobody talks about just peace about
justice that's a very bad sign because I
mean once unjust results of the war are
legitimized
the seizure of uh neighboring countries
land is accepted uh then you should
understand that we will continue
seeing the wars like this and you don't
know where the next war will start and
whether it will be again Russia or it
will be somebody else.
>> So would you want President Zilinski to
stand absolutely firm in the face of
pressure like that and not to for
example give up territory in the east in
the Donbass?
>> I think so. Yes. I I I don't think we
have a really uh
understanding I mean what will happen
next if Ukraine gives in. Russia will
not stop. Putin will not stop. There
will be maybe a break two or three years
or two or three months and there there
will be another demands to Ukraine to
give up more land to accept becoming
less independent
to accept becoming economically weak and
in the end actually Europe will say no
we we cannot help you anymore because
you are not really uh doing enough to
defend yourself that your population is
not motivated that you are tired. That's
a terrible picture that I have now
talking about this in my mind because uh
this will be like shrinking country with
shrinking freedoms and with shrinking
importance on the geopolitical map of
the world.
>> How widely do you think your sense that
Zalinski should stand firm? How widely
do you think that is shared? Andre, and
I asked that because there is some
evidence from polling that because of
the grinding nature of the war, because
of the harsh conditions in Kiev and
elsewhere,
that there are more people coming round
to the idea that giving up some
territory might be a price worth paying.
>> Well, first of all, let's define what
does it mean to give up the territories.
I [snorts] mean the idea that the
territories are not returned to Ukraine
but not turned into Russian territories
like free economic zone. I mean this
idea was discussed with Americans. I
mean this I think this can be
acceptable. This can be discussed
further. But generally I think we have
between 50 and 60% of Ukrainians who
still support Zalinski. So I think uh
approximately the same number of people
think that he should be firm and he
should try his best to defend Ukrainian
interests thinking about the future of
Ukraine and not only about today's
catastrophic situation
>> and do you still have confidence in him
as Ukraine's leader? Because I know that
you didn't vote for him. you were not a
fan of his in the beginning, but that
when you saw how he handled the moment
of allout war four years ago, you
started to feel differently about him.
>> Well, I think it's my duty as a citizen
to support officially elected
government, officially elected president
in this situation. I don't know whether
I will vote for him next time if he
takes part in the elections after the
war or not. But now actually I think uh
we we should be consolidated around the
existing power and he uh didn't show the
signs of weakness. He didn't show
readiness to compromise. So he is still
defending Ukrainian interests.
>> How damaged has he been by the recent
corruption scandal?
>> Actually I think less than expected. Uh
but of course I mean I have a feeling
that he is now alone. I also think that
actually this question of corruption in
the top circles of the Ukrainian
political elite will reappear after the
war and it can become an argument uh in
political discussions including
discussions between different
presidential candidates before the
elections
>> and your own personal reaction to those
allegations when you're a citizen and
you're facing the hardships of war and
you learn that people are accused of
embezzlement and funds may have gone
into the wrong place. How does it make
you feel?
>> Well, I am very angry and I was very
upset as everybody else and I don't have
much trust in generally in Ukrainian
political elite because uh I remember
when Ukraine was completely corrupt from
the grassroot level, from the traffic
police level. I mean this was going when
Yusenko became president and actually he
managed to to get rid of this grassroot
level corruption. But the corruption in
the top uh levels of uh political
business elite I mean remained and I
mean it's good in a way that we have
these scandals regularly because they
show that this corruption is uncovered
and it's interesting that this
corruption is uncovered more often by
the journalist investigative journalists
than by the special anti-corruption
bodies. But after the uh information
from the journalist, usually the
anti-corruption bodies begin the
investigations
and of course not often or not always uh
the people accused of corruption are
detained and sentenced. This is another
issue. Recently they were allowed to
leave the country and now they are not
uh to be reached by by Ukrainian
justice.
>> Do you still have confidence Andre in
European allies? They obviously sound
very different to the US, but do you
think that that could eb away or become
elusive as you characterize the United
States attitude to Ukraine?
>> Well, if you if you listen to Prime
Minister of Hungary, Orban, of course,
yes, you will immediately uh become a
pessimist. Yeah. But uh uh I mean now we
are listening to the politicians and we
listen to those who are saying nice
things, who are promising more help,
etc. And that's uh how we get our energy
and our relative optimism. But of course
I mean I understand that there are
limits and the time is the main
question. How long more European Union
can be supportive of Ukraine. Uh and
which I mean also I mean we should
understand actually what will happen
inside European Union. uh taken into
consideration the rise of extreme right
political forces and the possibility of
for example ADF party in Germany to to
come and to become a majority in the
parliament. This is quite frightful.
>> You said earlier when the war comes to
an end and I know it's an impossible
question to answer but are you preparing
yourself for another four years of this?
Uh
I I hope that the war will be over this
year or next year. I mean this this is
my dream. I was born 16 years after the
end of the Second World War. I remember
that Kiev didn't have traces of war. So
I mean everything was new. Everything
was rebuilt. There was a lot of building
going on and new parks.
So I think that when the war is over it
will take another probably 10 years uh
uh maybe more maybe 15 years uh to
remove the scars of the war but the
scars physical visible on the ground not
from people's heads from people's uh
thoughts and of course I mean the
society probably will be split and
people will be uh in different groups
they maybe will not be very friendly in
the beginning to each other those who
left and those who stayed then the
number of collaborators and traitors
it's something that makes me always very
sad it started from Crimea where
probably 80 90% of civil servants and
the people from the Ukrainian secret
service turned out to be Russian agents
or immediately were employed by Russian
administration and became Russians. So I
mean this is something that probably
will be discussed after the war a lot.
>> It's a long road ahead one way or
another. What about your own future?
When do you plan to go home to go back
to Kiev?
>> Well, one it is warm once there is a
sun. Uh but generally actually I mean my
uh stay here in the residence is
limited. So I will be here until the end
of March and then slowly uh not using
airplanes because I came by car. I will
be moving in the direction of KF and
sometime in April when it is time to
plant uh potatoes and vegetables and we
do it in our uh garden. Uh that's when I
plan to come back.
>> And will there be another war diary?
You've done three volumes of your war
diaries.
Can you do more, do you think? Do you
have it in you?
>> The last one is called Three Years on
Fire, uh, Destruction of Ukraine. I
continue to write diary and essays. I
didn't plan the book number four and I
hope that it will not be needed. But,
uh, the texts are here. The texts are in
the computer. some texts are published
and if it is important I can easily uh
prepare volume number four.
>> Does that mean that every day you are
writing your reflections on the war as
well as your fiction?
>> Practically yes but some reflections are
very short some are five pages long. So
they they are different.
uh but I do I do write every day and
actually I start uh my day with coffee
and reflections and only then I move on
to my next chapter of a new novel.
>> So it's almost like your day has to
begin with the war chronicle before you
can free your mind back to your
imagination.
>> Well, that's what happens because I mean
sometimes I wake up at 3:00 in the
morning. I check telegram channels for
the latest from the front lines. Then I
recheck it when I'm up at 6 7:00 in the
morning. And then of course I mean I I
react to each uh piece of news
especially if they are important or if
they are unusual. And then I exchange
messages with several of my friends and
I check what they are doing and how they
are and if they are town or city where
bombed, if they are okay, if they have
water and electricity and the messages I
exchange with my friends, they can be
also
can become entries in the future book if
necessary.
>> What about your humor and the nation's
humor? because I know you've written
about Ukrainians, especially in contrast
to Russians. You said that they uh are
able to find the humor in ordinary
situations, that soldiers were filming
funny videos on the front line to try
and keep the civilian population's
morale up. Is that still the case?
>> Unfortunately, actually uh the soldiers
humor was gone six or seven months into
fullscale invasion.
uh but the humor still I mean remains in
the society plays an important role
there is less humor now but I think
still it is used for the psychological
defense as a medicine as something that
keeps you motivated and keeps you uh
hopeful
>> I want to share one reflection with you
that I've heard here in London from a
Ukrainian I spoke to who began the year
just saying to me we are so tired now
she's not living in the country at At
the moment, she's far from the front
line, but she goes back to see her
mother and she just feels this immense
weariness at this ongoing situation. How
do you keep your energy up, let alone
your spirits up at a time like this?
>> Well, I I think my morale is kept by my
friends, by my readers, by my connection
to the world, by my desire to write, by
new ideas that I have, by coffee that I
drink too much. uh but I know a lot of
people who are suffering and these
people actually uh they have nobody to
motivate them. They have uh financial
problems. They are not helped enough.
These people are tied. These people are
wary. These people actually have no
hope.
>> And is it part of your job to keep
giving or sharing some hope to the best
of your abilities?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean the main thing is not
to share bad news. Unfortunately, many
social networks users in Ukraine, they
love to share bad news. Things are bad,
but when you actually sharing bad news,
you are multiplying this.
>> But where's the good news these days? Is
it in the individual resilience? What do
you see that makes you feel less bad
about the situation?
Well, I mean, uh, the fact that
actually, uh, the Ukrainian participant
of Euro Vision was, uh, uh, chosen a
couple of days ago with a brilliant song
and this lady actually lives in Germany.
She's Ukrainian refugee. I'm thinking
that actually it's very important that
her voice will be heard on eur
Eurovision. Ukrainian sports people, I
mean skiers are taking part in Cortina
Dumpets Olympic competitions. I mean
Ukrainian writers up in Paris and
reading their poetry in Ukrainian. So I
mean like Ukraine is becoming more and
more engaged in different spheres of
European life. And this is my hope that
actually we are part of Europe. If
Ukraine disappears, it will probably
provoke collapse of the European Union.
But definitely it will show that
democratic values are not really values
that keep people of the civilized world
together.
>> Andrea Kirkov, thank you for talking to
us. Best of luck with the new novel as
you continue writing it. Thank you.
>> Thank you. Thank you very much.
>> [music]